Propose problem statement (#1)
perturbing/CIPs: CPS-0000/README.md

<!-- A short (\~200 word) description of the target goals and the technical obstacles to those goals. -->

## Problem
Cardano relies on public-key cryptography for transaction authorization,
delegation, stake pool operations, and consensus-critical functions. The
security of the settlement layer therefore depends on cryptographic primitives
that were designed against classical attackers and may not remain secure
against sufficiently capable quantum attackers.

### Context: why this matters now

> Quantum hardware continues to progress. More importantly, the estimated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quantum hardware continues to advance. More importantly, the estimated
```

resources needed to attack currently deployed public-key cryptography continue

> to decrease. This reduces confidence in long safety margins and suggests that

Reviewer: Could you please add some source for this statement?

Also, could you expand on what "long safety margins" means in this context?

practical attacks may arrive earlier than previously expected.

This matters at the Cardano settlement layer because migration of base-layer

> cryptography is slow and coordination-heavy. Any change in this area affects

Reviewer: This is a strong point! Nice :)

ledger rules, consensus, node implementations, wallets, stake pool operators,
exchanges, and other ecosystem participants. It also requires broad community
alignment and careful rollout planning. As a result, Cardano cannot wait until
the risk becomes immediate before preparing a migration path.

> Cardano also exposes many public keys on-chain, and some of them remain valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cardano exposes many public keys on-chain, and some of them remain used
```

> for long periods of time. This creates a "harvest now, exploit later" risk:

Reviewer: I do not think the "harvest now, exploit later" risk applies to our case.

This risk is for encryption; we run a public blockchain. ;)

I think you are trying to say here that these long periods where public keys are "known" to all create the risks that private keys get compromised by a QC.
